although watery face reflected with a
pure grace by many turnings through the
trees that bitter journey to the Seas
the queen of rivers Raritan one English
poet John Davis wrote those words in
1806 the Raritan was largely untouched
200 years later however it was a largely
different story the Raritan had endured
decades of industrial abuse from the
chemical belt especially along the lower
part of the river environmental
organizations like Edison wetlands
Association in New York New Jersey Bay
keeper took the lead in trying to change
that the edison wetlands association
started the Raritan River Project back
in 1989 with the goal of cleaning up
contaminated sites that were draining
into the Raritan River estuary we
started with just two sites the Kim buck
Superfund site and the chemical
insecticides site which are now it
essentially cleaned up but what we have
now is a much more widespread problem
than we originally thought historically
we have a lot of contamination both on
the land side that's led to significant
contamination of the sediments in the
river and until we get those cleaned and
dredged and removed from the river we're
not gonna have full use of the river
which includes edible fish swimmable and
a safe place for people to access and
the reason why you're not crabbing
anymore from what I've read in the
newspapers you know I stopped tramping
like I said I didn't really cramp here I
craved more down by the New Brunswick
bridge have you seen an increase in fish
population fish populations yes more
bait fish more targeted species have
come into the bay and are hanging for
the whole summer so we've got a good
fishery throughout the summer in both
the bay and the river the round river is
our border in the KP section of town
it's a great natural resource is
something we're very proud to have order
in our town and we're hoping that a lot
of work is done in the few
toward cleaning it up and making it more
available for operation uses we believe
that the case be area presents an
opportunity for balanced development
with the right emphasis placed on the
environment for example the El Paso site
that has 160 acres no one thinks it's
gonna be all warehouses no one thinks
it's going to be all water wetlands so
in betweens a mix that we can achieve a
balance with to have the proper economic
development to cream available to the
township yet protect the wildlife down
there and all the natural resources and
wetlands that exist in the area
Woodbridge and all of the business
owners and property owners in the KSP
area along the Raritan River primarily
in conjunction with and partnership with
Edison wetlands I have worked on a very
very ambitious project but a wonderful
project that can be a model for other
communities to follow we're trying to
create a balance between business owners
redevelopment public access and creating
green space bringing all of these groups
together has provided a wonderful
platform to do that and hopefully will
be very successful in our effort we're
down here perth amboy along the Rardin
and you see the bridges behind me for
millions of New Jersey families that's
the only way they get to encounter the
Riordan is looking at the side of their
car windows as they zoom down Garden
State Parkway route 9 route 35 or
further upriver the New Jersey Turnpike
in route 1 that's their only encounter
with the Raritan but as the state's
longest river it shouldn't be that way
and that's one of the things that all
the groups working together today are
trying to change the route and we talked
about as the longest river in New Jersey
but it's also significant regionally how
would you characterize the Raritan
significance to the Greater New York
Harbor first off it brings a tremendous
volume of water and and associated
sediments that come downstream it's got
a tremendous diversity abundance of
wildlife
it's a corridor for for birds along the
Flyway a lot of dozens of different fish
species use the Raritan River it's an
active recreation area although the
lower part of the river has been more
challenging for citizens and residents
to get to than other areas
but it's an incredibly important part of
the ecosystem and it's a part that
hasn't got the same kind of attention
and resources to improve it that other
areas like the Meadowlands where there's
been a tremendous renaissance has taken
place it's it's really time for the
Raritan River to take its places is a
key component of the larger estuary not
only a fisherman and crabbers returning
to the variety but birders and wildlife
enthusiasts are rediscovering their art
and scenic beauty and diverse wildlife
in fact Edison wetlands Bay keeper and
route and River keeper just launched the
Barren River kayak and canoe Club giving
people a chance to experience the
wildlife firsthand
have you seen despite all the garbage
have you seen does it seem like the
river is rebounding from the water
sampling the wildlife have you have you
noticed anything like that well I know
last year we cleaned up the same spot
just different areas and the river
actually looked a lot cleaner and in one
of my classes we actually saw a harbor
seal swimming in the river last week so
so it sounds like getting down to the
river firsthand thank you and and seeing
the river firsthand really makes a
difference and students are just in a
hurry rushing to and fro trying to get
down to the river as you see here and
that in itself I think we've noticed and
it sounds like it transfers to Rutgers
students is that seeing the river
directly really makes a difference in
terms of the enthusiasm yes it really
does whenever we get students to
actually go out to the river they really
are a lot more interested in making a
difference with it and can really see
the problems and the issues that it
faces the river Judy how do you a vision
a coalition of groups working together
for the future of the restoration of the
Red River the very essence of each group
is that they have a committed team of
people and a focus on all of the same
values and we really want to see if we
can't bring those all together and use
the power of the entire group
to persuade people in policy areas that
we are serious about this and that we
are working together I think in the
future we have opportunities economic
and research oriented that will build
from the powers of all of the or
and help us to restore the area in a way
that can be maintained through projects
from the Rutgers University campus
Edison wetlands often get asked what is
the Raritan River project and when you
come down to the Raritan River you
understand why we need to clean up these
areas and yet it's a wetlands
Association has been working on cleaning
up toxic waste sites holding those who
have polluted the river accountable for
cleaning it up working on issues of
public access so that people can once
again come down to the river we hope to
see more people come in and work with us
to on those goals we hope to bring more
folks in from Rutgers in other areas
because this is a common mission and
this is something that benefits the
entire region by making the Raritan
River clean and green again I'm David
wheeler from wild New Jersey TV signing
off from the banks of the Raritan River
New Jersey's own Queen of Rivers
the first bill that